THE ODYSSEY OF HOMER

BOOK I

ARGUMENT.

MINERVA'S DESCENT TO ITHACA.

The poem opens within forty eight days of the arrival of Ulysses
in his dominions. He had now remained seven years in the Island of
Calypso, when the gods assembled in council, proposed the method
of his departure from thence and his return to his native country.
For this purpose it is concluded to send Mercury to Calypso, and
Pallas immediately descends to Ithaca. She holds a conference with
Telemachus, in the shape of Mantes, king of Taphians; in which she
advises him to take a journey in quest of his father Ulysses, to
Pylos and Sparta, where Nestor and Menelaus yet reigned; then,
after having visibly displayed her divinity, disappears. The
suitors of Penelope make great entertainments, and riot in her
palace till night. Phemius sings to them the return of the
Grecians, till Penelope puts a stop to the song. Some words arise
between the suitors and Telemachus, who summons the council to
meet the day following.



The man for wisdom's various arts renown'd,
Long exercised in woes, O Muse! resound;
Who, when his arms had wrought the destined fall
Of sacred Troy, and razed her heaven-built wall,
Wandering from clime to clime, observant stray'd,
Their manners noted, and their states survey'd,
On stormy seas unnumber'd toils he bore,
Safe with his friends to gain his natal shore:
Vain toils! their impious folly dared to prey
On herds devoted to the god of day;
The god vindictive doom'd them never more
(Ah, men unbless'd!) to touch that natal shore.
Oh, snatch some portion of these acts from fate,
Celestial Muse! and to our world relate.

Now at their native realms the Greeks arrived;
All who the wars of ten long years survived;
And 'scaped the perils of the gulfy main.
Ulysses, sole of all the victor train,
An exile from his dear paternal coast,
Deplored his absent queen and empire lost.
Calypso in her caves constrain'd his stay,
With sweet, reluctant